Re-Pitch: I’ve chosen three different Manhattan colleges (Columbia, F.I.T and CUNY). 
These percentages were based upon students who were enrolled full time (FT) at these 
colleges and categorized by whether or not they pay in-state tuition or out-of-state tuition. 
Columbia is the most expensive but doesn’t increase in tuition price for undergraduate 
students that aren’t New York State residents.  I’ve used this in comparison to F.I.T and 
CUNY because although it doesn’t charge more for out of state tuition, it’s nearly triple 
the amount of the other two Manhattan colleges. Though they’re cheaper, out of state 
residents are paying nearly double what New York State students pay for the same 
education, how does this effect the wealth gap? This small portion of New York City 
undergraduate tuition cost is pushing students to borrow more just because they’re not 
residents in that particular state – leading them to borrow more than they would have had 
they been a resident in New York. 

Undergraduate Student Debt by Tom Davis

There are a couple of ways students pay for their undergraduate education; they have

resources to acquire the money on their own accord, they can borrow through student 

loans or they are on a need based plan that requires help from the state, either through 

grants, loans, scholarships or work-study. 

Either route a student takes, they still have to pay something. In America, students begin 

to make major life decisions once they’re in their junior in high school. These students 

are usually around the age 17-19 when they’re asked to choose colleges, careers and 

make fiscally responsible decisions. 

Choosing a college can be tough. Teenagers have to find a school that not only fits their 

interests but also suits their financial capabilities, in return affecting where they go to 

school and the opportunities/disadvantages that come along with. 

Student Loan Justice is an organization dedicated to returning standard consumer 

protections to student loans and has focuses primarily on research, media outreach, and 

grassroots lobbying initiatives. 

Founder of the Student Loan Justice organization, Alan Collinge said, “Many people who 

are paying student loans aren't able to pay enough to reduce their balances so they are 

seeing their debt increase every year rather than the opposite.”

Do those who can afford get more?

American education comes with a price tag, but not only are expenses a nightmare but 

what they school has to offer can have a major affect on a students life post college 

graduation. Though students are walking out with a bachelor’s degree and more loans 

than they know what to do with – there may be post-graduation earning potential.

According to a PayScale College Salary Report for 2013-2014, Petroleum Engineering, 

Actuarial Mathematics and Nuclear Engineering have the highest earning potential of 

a salary between $60-$103,000 for a recent grad’s starting median pay.

ANALYSIS ON THAT EARNING POTENTIAL

Navigating the financial system as an undergraduate student can be daunting and 

intimidating. Students are borrowing money to afford school because they can and feel it 

may be there only option to experience future opportunities. 

Anne Most, 22, a recent Drexel University graduate owed close to $150, 000 for four 

years but with the help of her parents and a few grants, Most left with a little under 

$50,000 in student loans.

“I can't say that I let money have much of an impact on my undergraduate 

education. I guess my motto was enjoy now, pay later. Paying back my loans will 

certainly be a grueling process, but going to Drexel gave me opportunities that I 

couldn't haven gotten anywhere else, so I don't regret it at all. But call me in ten 

years and I'll probably say otherwise,” said Most.

1 STUDENT SOURCE TK: Sarah Galo - sarah.galo@gmail.com - Phone Appt. Wed. 

Afternoon

Though F.I.T’s undergraduate student tuition amounts to just under $18K, the cost 

doesn’t stop there. If you take into account Health Insurance, Health Services, 

Laboratory, Estimated Books and Supplies fees – out-of-state undergraduate student 

could accrue a yearly charge of $20,796 and that’s not including living expenses. 

1 STUDENT SOURCE TK: Kristi Stoppiello – kristabell@gmail.com - Skype Appt. 

Friday Morning

Bridget Emslie, a New Jersey resident, graduated Ramapo College of New Jersey in May 

2014. Emslie studied Nursing for four years and quickly became employed at Mount 

Sinai as a Nurse Practitioner in Pediatric Services. As an In-State resident, Emslie’s 

tuition costs were cut nearly half from $22K/year to $13K/year. 

Emslie who was also accepted to New York University chose to attend Ramapo College 

of New Jersey not only for its excellent nursing program’s reputation but also because of 

the in-state tuition difference.
=======
FINAL PROJECT PITCH
Team Wealth Gap

1. The target publication for this package. You should be thinking about a specific audience when conceiving your stories; choose a target publication that fits your intended audience. If a general news organization, name a specific department/section. Why would this audience be interested in this topic?

The target publication for this package is Quartz. Quartz’s audience is young business professionals and it has also covered issues that capture the intersections of race and economic affairs. 

2. A brief (2-paragraph) overview of competitive coverage. Have others covered this topic before/recently? If so, what are their angles? Why is it still worth covering?

These topics have been covered in Huffington Post, Business Insider, the Wall Street Journal, DNAInfo, Quartz, NBC, CNN Money, Bloomberg, Daily Finance, Tech Crunch, Fast Company and the New York Times. They are still worth covering because income inequality and the economy will likely have to be addressed in the upcoming presidential campaigns. 
In a time of rising income inequality around the country, some Americans are recovering better than others from the 2008 recession. For this package, we’ve decided to look at income inequality through the angle of race. The first story will examine the racial wealth gap and look at the entire city’s income by employment sector, highlighting any racial or ethnic differences that may exist. 
Some minority groups are faring off better than others post-2008 recession. Asians are closing the racial wealth gap with whites. Story two will critically contextualize the rising affluence of Asian families in New York City, in particular. Do Asians in New York have distinctly higher educational achievement than other groups? Are the gains in affluence concentrated in certain sub-sections of the Asian community? Are they entering professions, perhaps like tech, that are better-paying? 
Speaking of technology, it’s the fastest-growing industry in New York. Story three will address both the educational path and demographics of the tech industry in New York City. Is there a certain type of education required to access or be successful in tech here? Who is getting these jobs? Race will factor into this as technology tends to lack racial diversity. 
The fourth story will critically address how student loans and college debt impact the immediate and long-term earning and employment prospects of today's recent graduates. Given that the highest borrowing race is black, followed by Hispanic, then white, then Asian, this story will also break down students’ debt experience by race. 


 
STORIES

STORY #1—The racial wealth gap in New York City

Pitch:

This story is about rising income inequality in New York City, which has the highest income gap in between rich and poor in the United States. For this story, I will look into New York City’s income by employment sector, breaking down any existing racial and ethnic differences. Since the 2008 recession, Hispanic and Black earners have had a harder time in the recovery than white and the Asian population in New York City, thus widening the racial wealth gap. This is more so due to socioeconomic differences. Generally speaking, there is a higher concentration of African Americans and Hispanics in lower-income parts of New York City and middle-lower income earners were harder hit by the recession than higher-income earners. 
According to James Parrott, FPI’s Deputy Director and Chief Economist: “Nearly four out of five low-wage New York City workers are persons of color, and workers of color are twice as likely as a white, non-Hispanic worker to be low-wage—48% of black workers and 55% of Latino workers are paid less than $14 an hour, while 23% of white workers are paid less than $14 an hour.” Additionally, African Americans and Hispanics tend to have lower higher graduation rates, and people who attain higher education typically tend to earn higher salaries. 
The stakeholders for this story are the city’s residents and local politicians. In fact, Mayor Bill de Blasio addressed the city’s income gap while he was running for office and has made it a part of his city agenda. 

Sources:
People
1.	Jilly Stephens, City Harvest 
Executive Director
646.412.0600
jstephens@cityharvest.org
(not contacted yet) 
2.	Adam Bee, an economist in the income stats branch of the U.S. Census Bureau 
	charles.a.bee@census.gov 
(not contacted yet) 
3.	Andrew A. Beveridge
A sociologist at Queens College of the City University of New York
	(888) 636-1118 (ext. 4)
	andy@socialexplorer.com
	(not contacted yet) 
4.	Laird W. Bergad, CUNY Professor 
212-817-8438
LBergad@gc.cuny.edu
(not contacted yet) 
5.	Community Service Society of New York, an anti-poverty advocacy and research group
Jeffrey N. Maclin, Director of Public Relations
212. 614. 5538
jmaclin@cssny.org
(not contacted yet) 

Data
1.	2013 American Community Survey Briefs from U.S. Census Bureau. Includes the following information on major American cities. The data format is in PDF. 
a.	Income data: http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2014/acs/acsbr13-02.pdf
b.	Poverty level: http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2014/acs/acsbr13-01.pdf

Reports 
1.	The concentration of wealth in NYC (CUNY)
a.	Includes information on breakdown of wealth by ethnicity and race
b.	Laird W. Bergad, CUNY Professor 
212-817-8438
LBergad@gc.cuny.edu

Visualizations

1.	The first visualization will be a bar chart and I imagine it to show what proportion of total income do the upper- middle- and lower-income earners control in New York City and how that has changed over the past 10 years. I would like to include something that shows what proportion of those earners are white, black and hispanic. 
2.	The second visualization will be a map showing ethnic breakdown and wealth concentration in New York City.

STORY 2 - Tri-State College Debt
Pitch:

	We know that most people accumulate close to $100,000 in debt from borrowing student loans, but what makes race a major pitfall for the students who borrow? The U.S Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics calculated that Black and Hispanic students take much longer to pay off their debt. According to Bloomberg Business, Black and White students borrowed the same amount in 2012 but black students take a larger hit by paying off their debt for many more years that white students. The question I pose is why do black students have more trouble finding well paying jobs that enable them to pay off their student debt? I’d like to see how Obama’s “Pay As You Earn” or PAYE program that began in 2012 has made a difference in the way recent graduates are coping with their student debt, as well as other loan-assistance programs. I’d also like to see how students are targeting their job search to maximize their tuition ROI, so to speak.

Source List:

People:
1. Heather Jarvis – Student Loan Expert, Askheatherjarvis.com, 843-441-3656
2. Student Loan Company – Sallie Mae
3. Amanda Clayman – NYC Financial Wellness Expert, aclayman@actorsfund.org,
4. Sarah Galo – Recent Graduate from Ramapo College of New Jersey – Intern at The Guardian, sarah.galo@gmail.com

Data:
1. Student Debt and the Class of 2014 http://projectonstudentdebt.org/files/pub/Student_Debt_and_the_Class_of_2013_NR.pdf, a project focused on making higher education more available and affordable for people of all backgrounds released a report in November 2014 and it calculated the cumulative student loan debt of recent college graduates from four-year schools. It estimates state-by-state averages and identifies high- and low-debt schools. They use figures provided voluntarily by more than half of all public and nonprofit bachelor’s degree granting four-year colleges, representing 83% of bachelor’s degree recipients from those two types of colleges combined. For-profit bachelor’s degree granting four-year colleges are not included in any of this report’s 2013 figures because only one percent of the surveyed colleges, representing three percent of for-profit bachelor’s degree recipients, chose to provide debt data.

Visualizations: 

I would say that the most appropriate visualization of this Manhattan Student Debt by Race data would be a bar chart and/or line graph. It will represent student income post graduation broken down between average White and Black student debt within four different Manhattan colleges. I would like to integrate data from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who reported that between 2004 and 2012, student debt tripled from $365 Billion to $966 Billion within six years. The Wisconsin Hope Lab also produced a survey in 2014, The color of Student Debt, which broke down the amount of borrowed between black, white, Hispanic, native American and Asian. I’d like to use the data specific to black and white students and show the differences borrowed through subsidized and unsubsidized loans.  

STORY 3 - Tech Industry

Pitch:
       	The growing tech industry is creating new opportunities that pay, on average, 49 percent more than New York City’s hourly wage, according to a report called “The New York City Tech Ecosystem.” But who are the people obtaining these jobs and how are they doing so? This story will focus on the demographics of the tech industry and show who is getting these jobs. White people and Asians make up the majority of people working in tech jobs, with black and Hispanic people making up only 1 and 7 percent of people working at several major tech companies. This story will break down the current demographics of the tech industry by race, as well as identify the types of college degrees and programs that people are pursuing in order to find tech jobs. I will also include the recruiters’ side to show what types of people they look for when filling tech positions.

Source list:
People:
o   Chris McGarry, Director for Entrepreneurship of Columbia’s Alumni Relations and Development
Email: 	cm2014@columbia.edu
	entrepreneurship@columbia.edu

o   Orin Herskowitz, Vice President of Intellectual Property and Tech Transfer at Columbia University and Executive Director of Columbia Technology Ventures
Email: 	cm2014@columbia.edu
	
o   Marina Dadashev, Director of Career Services, Cornell Tech
Email:	md87@cornell.edu

o   Tom O'Connell, Program Director, Code/Interactive
Email:	tom@weare.ci

o   Jonathan Gardner, VP of Communications, and Anna Lindow, Digital Marketing Instructor, of General Assembly
Email:	jag@generalassemb.ly

Data:
o   The NYC Tech Economy (http://www.nyctecheconomy.com/)
•	Includes income information and number of jobs
Press contact: Iva Benson of Rubenstein
Email: ibenson@rubenstein.com
Phone: 212-843-8271
o   Diversity reports of major tech companies (http://bit.ly/1uV7l2E) 
•	Biz Carzon created graphics for this on gigaom.com
o   New York State Comptroller’s Office report, “New York City’s Growing High-Tech Industry” (http://www.osc.state.ny.us/osdc/rpt2-2015.pdf)
•	Includes income, investments, number of jobs and a map of job “hotspots”
	Contact:  212-383-1388

Visualizations: 
1.     The first visualization will be a demographic breakdown of the tech industry. The chart type will be either a stacked bar graph or it will be a pie chart with data from the diversity reports of major tech companies: Facebook, Google, Twitter, Apple, eBay, Yahoo and LinkedIn. Each bar or pie slice will be a racial breakdown of the company. This idea was inspired by graphs created by Biz Carson for http://gigaom.com. (Link to Carson’s work: http://bit.ly/1uV7l2E) The reason for choosing a pie chart is so that I’m not creating a chart that looks exactly like Biz Carson’s. Another possibility would be to do a stacked column chart.
2.     The second visualization will show the job growth of the tech industry, compared to other major industries that drive New York, as well as the average U.S. growth. The information will be conveyed in a line graph showing growth over time with data from either the Bureau of Labor Statistics or The NYC Tech Economy.



STORY 4 - Asians and the wealth gap

Pitch: 

Asian families are closing the racial wealth gap with white families. The typical Asian family has earned more money than white families for most of the past two decades and federal researchers estimate that Asian earners will surpass whites in net worth in the next 10 to 20 years. This story will address the factors that have contributed to how Asian families have been able to consistently bring in higher earnings – education levels, industry demographics and ethnicity. Asian families tend to emphasize education, with 65% of Asians between ages 35 and 39 having a college degree, compared with 42% of whites, 26% of blacks and 16% of Hispanics, according to the Census Bureau.

Source List: 

People:
o   Mae Ngai, professor of history and Lung family professor of Asian American studies
Email: mn53@columbia.edu
Phone: 212-854-2518
o   Catherine Fennell, associate professor of comparative ethnic studies and anthropology, Columbia University, affiliated with the university’s Center for the Study of Ethnicity and Race
Email: ckf2106@columbia.edu
Phone: 212-854-4552
o   John Gamber, assistant professor of English and comparative literature, Columbia University, affiliated with the university’s Center for the Study of Ethnicity and Race. 
Email: jbg2134@columbia.edu
Phone: 212-854-2058
Data:

o Pew Research Center (): Asian-Americans Lead All Others in Household Income

1.	The demographics of wealth: https://www.stlouisfed.org/~/media/Files/PDFs/HFS/essays/HFS-Essay-1-2015-Race-Ethnicity-and-Wealth.pdf
a.	Produced by St. Louis Federal Reserve
i.	Contains median household income information, net worth, debt, total assets and education levels
2.	Asian-Americans Lead All Others in Household Income:
http://pewrsr.ch/OD4kDM
a.	Produced by the Pew Research Center
i.	Contains median household income information and breakdown of Asian groups

Visualizations: 
1.	The first visualization will be a line graph that shows how the median income of Asian Americans has been trending over the years compared to whites, blacks and Hispanics.
2.	The second visualization will be a pie chart that breaks down the population of Asian, white, black and Hispanic in New York City.

